pyqgis add TOC managing (#3784)
qgis/QGIS-Documentation: source/docs/pyqgis_developer_cookbook/legend.rst

.. _projectpy:

*****************
Accessing the TOC
*****************

.. contents::
   :local:

If you’re outside the pyqgis console, the code snippets on this page need the
following imports:

.. testcode::

   from qgis.core import (QgsProject,
                          QgsLayerTreeGroup,
                          QgsLayerTreeLayer,
                          )

> You can use different classes to access all the loaded layer in the TOC and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use different classes to access all the loaded layers in the TOC and
```

use them to retrieve information.

> QgsProject class

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The QgsProject class
```

> ================

Reviewer: ```suggestion
====================
```

> You can use the :class:`QgsProject <qgis.core.QgsProject>` to retrieve

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use :class:`QgsProject <qgis.core.QgsProject>` to retrieve
```

information about the TOC and all the layer loaded.

> You have to create an ``instance`` of the :class:`QgsProject <qgis.core.QgsProject>`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You have to create an ``instance`` of :class:`QgsProject <qgis.core.QgsProject>`
```

and use its method to get the loaded layers.

> The main method is :meth:`mapLayers() <qgis.core.QgsProject.mapLayers>` that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main method is :meth:`mapLayers() <qgis.core.QgsProject.mapLayers>`. It
```

will return a dictionary of the loaded layers:

.. code-block:: python

  d = QgsProject.instance().mapLayers()
  d
  {'ne_10m_populated_places_82a2e342_f2a0_4496_b5bc_fdd5a2bea4d8': <qgis._core.QgsVectorLayer object at 0x7f1e98c438b8>, 'countries_d0c46c9f_2bd6_4745_9bbd_5bf265500431': <qgis._core.QgsVectorLayer object at 0x7f1e98c43828>, 'regions_77909407_0815_4c37_96e3_19e9f2aa2657': <qgis._core.QgsVectorLayer object at 0x7f1e98c43678>}

> the dictionary ``keys`` are the unique layer id while the ``values`` are the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the dictionary ``keys`` are the unique layer ids while the ``values`` are the
```

related objects.

> It is now straightforward to obtain any other information of the layers:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is now straightforward to obtain any other information about the layers:
```

.. code-block:: python

  # list of layer names using list comprehension
  l = [layer.name() for layer in QgsProject.instance().mapLayers().values()]
  # dictionary with key = layer name and value = layer object
  d = {}
  for l in QgsProject.instance().mapLayers().values():
    d[l.name()] = l
  d
  {'ne_10m_populated_places': <qgis._core.QgsVectorLayer object at 0x7f1e98c438b8>, 'regions': <qgis._core.QgsVectorLayer object at 0x7f1e98c43678>, 'countries': <qgis._core.QgsVectorLayer object at 0x7f1e98c43828>}

> Else you can also query the TOC by the name of the layer:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also query the TOC using the name of the layer:
```

.. code-block:: python

    country_layer = QgsProject.instance().mapLayersByName("countries")[0]

> .. note:: it returns a list with all the matching layers, for this we indexed with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. note:: A list with all the matching layers is returned, so we index with
```

>   ``[0]`` to get the first (an unique layer with this name)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  ``[0]`` to get the first layer with this name.
```

Reviewer 2: +1 with @havatv rewording, since I think something was missing around the "for this"

QgsLayerTreeGroup class
=======================

The layer tree is a classical tree structure built of nodes. There are currently

> two types of nodes: group nodes :class:`QgsLayerTreeGroup <qgis.core.QgsLayerTreeGroup>`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
two types of nodes: group nodes (:class:`QgsLayerTreeGroup <qgis.core.QgsLayerTreeGroup>`)
```

> and layer nodes :class:`QgsLayerTreeLayer <qgis.core.QgsLayerTreeLayer>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and layer nodes (:class:`QgsLayerTreeLayer <qgis.core.QgsLayerTreeLayer>`).
```

.. note:: for more information you can read this blog posts of Martin Dobias:
  `Part 1 <https://www.lutraconsulting.co.uk/blog/2014/07/06/qgis-layer-tree-api-part-1/>`_
  `Part 2 <https://www.lutraconsulting.co.uk/blog/2014/07/25/qgis-layer-tree-api-part-2/>`_
  `Part 3 <https://www.lutraconsulting.co.uk/blog/2015/01/30/qgis-layer-tree-api-part-3/>`_

The project layer tree can be accessed easily with the method :meth:`layerTreeRoot() <qgis.core.QgsProject.layerTreeRoot>`
of the :class:`QgsProject <qgis.core.QgsProject>` class:

.. code-block:: python

    root = QgsProject.instance().layerTreeRoot()

> ``root`` is a group node and has *children*:

Reviewer 2: Looks like it's a special group node, isn't it? its type returns a QgsLayerTree while manually added groups are of QgsLayerTreeGroup (group node)
_PS: inheritance matters and myself are two_

.. code-block:: python

    root.children()

> It returns a list of only direct children, sub group children should be accessed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A list of direct children is returned. Sub group children should be accessed
```

> from their own sub groups.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
from their own direct parent.
```
too many "sub" 😄

> We can retrieving one of the children:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We can retrieve one of the children:
```

> .. code-block:: python

Reviewer 2: doctest? testcode?

    child0 = root.children()[0]
    child0
    <qgis._core.QgsLayerTreeGroup object at 0x7f1e1ea54168>

> There are come useful methods to retrieve layers by their unique ``ids``:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Layers can also be retrieved using their (unique) ``ids``:
```

Reviewer 2: should their unique id be plural?

.. code-block:: python

    ids = root.findLayerIds()

>     ids

Reviewer: Output is missing.

    # access the first layer of the ids list
    root.findLayer(ids[0])

> And at the same time also groups can be searched by their names:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And groups can also be searched using their names:
```

.. code-block:: python

    root.findGroup('Group Name')

:class:`QgsLayerTreeGroup <qgis.core.QgsLayerTreeGroup>` has many other useful

> method that can be used to obtain other information of the TOC:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
methods that can be used to obtain more information about the TOC:
```

.. code-block:: python

    # list of all the checked layers in the TOC
    cl = root.checkedLayers()
    cl
    [<qgis._core.QgsVectorLayer object at 0x7f1e98c43678>]

Now let’s add some layers to the project’s layer tree. There are two ways of doing
that:

> #. **Explicit addition** with :meth:`addLayer() <qgis.core.QgsLayerTreeGroup.addLayer>`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. **Explicit addition** using the :meth:`addLayer() <qgis.core.QgsLayerTreeGroup.addLayer>`
```

   or :meth:`insertLayer() <qgis.core.QgsLayerTreeGroup.insertLayer>`
   functions:

   .. code-block:: python

      # create a temporary layer
      layer1 = QgsVectorLayer("path_to_layer", "Layer 1", "memory")
      # add the layer to the legend, last position
      root.addLayer(layer1)
      # add the layer at given position
      root.insertLayer(5, layer1)

> #. **Implicit addition**: while the project's layer tree is connected to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. **Implicit addition**: since the project's layer tree is connected to the
```

Reviewer: Not sure if this is what you mean...

> #. **Implicit addition**: while the project's layer tree is connected to the

Reviewer 2: "while": does it mean that they could not be connected? in which case could be nice to know how the connection can be set, in order to use this code. Or you meant "since".

   layer registry it is enough to add a layer to the map layer registry:

   .. code-block:: python

       QgsProject.instance().addMapLayer(layer1)

You can switch between :class:`QgsVectorLayer <qgis.core.QgsVectorLayer>` and
:class:`QgsLayerTreeLayer <qgis.core.QgsLayerTreeLayer>` easily:

.. code-block:: python

    node_layer = root.findLayer(layer.id())
    node_layer
    <qgis._core.QgsLayerTreeLayer object at 0x7fecceb46ca8>
    node_layer.layer()
    <qgis._core.QgsVectorLayer object at 0x7fecceb46c18>

Groups  can be added with the :meth:`addGroup() <qgis.core.QgsLayerTreeGroup.addGroup>`

> method. The former will add a group to the end of the TOC while with the latter

Reviewer: ```suggestion
method. In the example below, the former will add a group to the end of the TOC while for the latter
```

> method. The former will add a group to the end of the TOC while with the latter

Reviewer 2: which former and latter are you referring to?

you can choose the position at which you want to add the group:

.. code-block:: python

    node_group1 = root.addGroup('Simple Group')
    # add a sub-group to Simple Group
    node_subgroup1 = node_group.addGroup("I'm a sub group")

> To remove nodes and groups there are many useful methods.

Reviewer 2: Here we introduce the task of **removing** nodes and groups and the examples (with introductory paragraph) that follow are mainly centered on **moving**.

> Moving an existing node is made in 3 steps:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Moving an existing node is done in three steps:
```

> 1. cloning the existing node

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. cloning the existing node
```

> 2. moving the cloned node to the desired position

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. moving the cloned node to the desired position
```

> 3. deleting the original node

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. deleting the original node
```

.. code-block:: python

    # clone the group
    cloned_group1 = node_group1.clone()
    # move the node (along with sub-groups and layers) to the top
    root.insertChildNode(0, cloned_group1)
    # remove the original node
    root.removeChildNode(node_group1)

> A little bit more *complicated* could be move a layer around the legend:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is a a little bit more *complicated* to move a layer around in the legend:
```

.. code-block:: python

    # get a QgsVectorLayer
    vl = QgsProject.instance().mapLayersByName("layer_name")[0]
    # create a QgsLayerTreeLayer object from vl by its id
    myvl = root.findLayer(vl.id())
    # clone the myvl QgsLayerTreeLayer object
    myvlclone = myvl.clone()
    # get the parent. If None (layer is not in group) returns ''
    parent = myvl.parent()
    # move the cloned layer to the top (0)
    parent.insertChildNode(0, myvlclone)
    # remove the original myvl
    root.removeChildNode(myvl)

or moving it to an existing group:

.. code-block:: python

    # get a QgsVectorLayer
    vl = QgsProject.instance().mapLayersByName("layer_name")[0]
    # create a QgsLayerTreeLayer object from vl by its id
    myvl = root.findLayer(vl.id())
    # clone the myvl QgsLayerTreeLayer object
    myvlclone = myvl.clone()
    # create a new group
    group1 = root.addGroup('Group1')
    # get the parent. If None (layer is not in group) returns ''
    parent = myvl.parent()
    # move the cloned layer to the top (0)
    group1.insertChildNode(0, myvlclone)
    # remove the QgsLayerTreeLayer from its parent
    parent.removeChildNode(myvl)

> Other methods are available to modify the groups and layers:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some other methods that can be used to modify the groups and layers:
```
